And I'm also swimming every other day to keep in shape.
But the irregular hours of eating and sleeping are just simple.
Now, on the East is East tour, that was a dry tour.
I did no drinking for the time I was on the tour, and I was utterly miserable the entire time.
On the Whaleville tour, I drank all the time, and I was utterly miserable.
So I figured we'll go back and see, like the square one.
You've got to be able to moderate in some place in the middle.
I'm not a moderating kind of guy, you know, that's the problem.
However, I do see that this tour eventually, toward the end, will take me to Edinburgh, where I haven't been since 1977.
And I think that the tour might get a little damp when I get to Edinburgh.
It takes you there when to do that?
Oh, God, I think in mid...
Mid-November.
The tour is about at least 46, right?
Some up there.
I would say, yeah, in the 30s anyway.
I'm not sure.
I didn't count.
You mentioned that you could be doing some research.
You don't mind if we hop around a little bit?
Yeah, anything you want.
Okay.
You said you're doing research in Madison for the next book.
Why Madison?
I could ask the same question.
I'm writing about an historical figure.
It's a love story set, a very perverted love story set in the turn of the century about a figure in my new neighborhood in Montecito, California.
I don't want to reveal his name, but he was the heir to a great industrial fortune from the Midwest.
A very handsome guy, graduated cum laude from Princeton in 96.
He got married in 1904 to a very beautiful woman.
I've seen her pictures.
Who was, you know, later to become strong in the suffragette movement.
She was also very wealthy, very cultured.
He was second graduate of MIT in the sciences.
But...
But shortly after the marriage, he had a schizophrenic breakdown, was confined on his estate up the street from my house for the rest of his life.
And for the next 20 years, he never laid eyes on any woman.
That includes his wife, his mother, his sister, because he would violently assault any woman he saw.
Finally, 20 years later, the wife, who hung in through all of this, even though the marriage was never consummated and the family was trying to get rid of her because of financial
situation she got a freudian shrink in and through analysis this gentleman began to calm down enough so that he could finally see his wife again after 20 years it's a great story why madison if this family's papers are gathered in the madison historical society this would be a long historical novel and you may have noticed since you've been with me off from the beginning you may have noticed that i'm doing
a longer historical novel, a collection, and then a contemporary novel.
And at the end of that, with this now, that cycle, the new stories have about two-thirds of the next book of stories done, which I've written this year after I finished that.
You've seen some of them, I think, in The New Yorker, and another will be in Playboy soon, and Paris Review, and so on.
But I like to do the stories in two separate periods because then I'm pressure.
So I'll hold those stories until after the novel.
I'll have another period of stories, and by then I'll have an idea for another inflammatory contemporary novel.
A couple of questions arising out of this.
Thank you.
Is this something you just created in the neighborhood?
I read an article.
Montecito had a lot of great estates built there in the period of 1900 through around 1920 and beyond, but especially in that era because it was pre-income tax.
The very wealthy industrialists, particularly from Chicago, New York, and so on, couldn't they go to Florida?
They could just get in their own Pullman car and go out to California.
And there were a lot of great stories associated with it.
This one in particular fascinated me.
You may remember all the way back to Descent of Man how much I love monkeys and I'm obsessed with them.
This story also has monkeys.
The first primate lab ever in the world was on this guy's estate.
A shrink talked the wife into finding the primate lab on the estate
He figured if he could study the sexual habits of monkeys, he could apply it to her husband and cure him.
Of course, he didn't.
Are you going to use actual names?
Yeah.
I just don't want to reveal it right now because I don't want people to jump on my story.
It's going to take me two years to write it.
I mean, I'm sure.
No, these are historical figures, but they're minor.
I mean, no one knows about them.
But they're the best time, I think.
Tell the story that hasn't been told.
Exactly.
I've been going into the bookstores and, you know, he's just been there and there's piles of his books and I would say to the books, you know, my apprenticeship for having written The Tortilla Curtain was I wrote nine other books, you know, I went to college, I got a PhD, I went to writing school, I taught writing for 18 years.
His apprenticeship for writing his book was conquering a wreck.
Of course, he didn't actually write his book.
I'm 52, writing my first book, and I love the suggestion from my hometown.
i'm an overnight success you know yeah i said after 30 years of trying that's great anyway well people don't like to see you succeed i found that all my life you know every corner i turn people say you can't do that you know like uh you can't be a writer there's no money in it nobody could get published and then they said to me
You want to be a professor?
There's no jobs for a professor.
You're crazy.
I said, maybe there is one.
Maybe there's one, and that's the one I'm looking for.
That's right.
Well, my book had been under contract to randomize.
Under contract.
It canceled it.
And they told me, your book will not sell 3,000 copies.
I said, you're wrong.
You're wrong.
and we have 35,000 in print now, the third printing.
That is fantastic for a non-fiction specialized book like that.
Great.
Who is your publisher?
Both.
Well, he must be good at finding the niche for it and getting it in there.
You know, signing 400 books.
Hello.
You must be tough.
Yeah, I drink about half a cup of coffee every decade.
It makes, puts me into outer space.
Look at me, look at me.
I'm just, I'm skin and bones as it is.
Yeah, me too, right?
Anyway, you're talking about the novels, the stories.
It seems to me that you really have... You talk about how you're happy, number one, with the Ark of Ybtilio.
I think, obviously, you must be.
But it seems to me also that you've really plotted the Ark of Ybtilio.
Is that a fair statement?
Well, in the way that I just told you what I intend to do next.
I've always told my publisher what I'm going to do next, when I'm going to deliver it, and I always deliver it.
On time, on before.
As published?
Oh, yeah.
Pretty much as.
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm pretty determined to keep exploring my work and trying to grow and do different things.
But, I mean, I certainly don't calculate how the public is going to receive what I do.
That's something beyond my control.
For instance, with this book.
This is the first book that's really been controversial.
Sure.
There have been some very nasty attacks on me, ad hominem attacks on me in the press, and I realize it's because, just as I think you're suggesting, people think
Now, what perceive me now as being on top of the heap, and they don't like that.
They want to take me down a peg.
Secondly, too, of course, it's a real hot-button topic, and a lot of people are judging it on its politics, whether they agree or disagree, and not really, I think, looking into the deeper structure of it.
Well, you know, in time, I think they will.
I'm a part of that's largely coming from California where this is.
No.
Actually, there's been a lot of support in California.
There was a very nasty review in the L.A.
Times the other day, but they had already done a front-page lifestyle thing with a review of the book, which was very favorable.
It must make the people who read both of these things feel schizophrenic because the take on the book is so, so strange.
But, you know, California's moment may have been good.
In fact, I would say that normally when I come out with a book, I've been very lucky with the reviewers, maybe 9 to 1 in my favor.
I'd say this time we're running about maybe two-thirds in my favor.
However, those two-thirds are very passionate for me, and the one-third, oh, they are raking me over the coast.
And I'm also seeing on these live talk shows when the call ends, just mention the topic of illegal immigration.
People go insane, you know.
I had the great pleasure and distinction of being called human garbage on a radio show in San Francisco the other night.
I thanked the woman for the compliment.
Are people talking about the novel?
Yes, they are, if they get deeper into it.
I think the attacks on me, they're just reading the surface.
They're ready to...
It's very biased reviewing, I think.
They're ready to level their guns in me, and they let blast without really thinking about it.
And they've seen very propunctory summaries of them.
I think so, and inaccurate, too, in many cases.
That's what I found in my book.
I cannot believe the number of poets that have made reviews.
See, I anticipated this, Nick, many years ago.
You may remember in East is East, I wrote about the writer's colony and the petty jealousies and so on.
You know, you get to a point where you are seen, perceived as somebody that you really aren't because of all the profiles in the press and their books and so on.
And you're partly responsible for that.
Sure, sure.
Because you do project a persona.
That's right.
And because I have been so productive, this is my...
six books since 1987.
I'm out there always before the public and I think that kind of grates on other writers perhaps who aren't doing as well or think that they should be doing better and so on.
it's inevitable but again uh i began to realize that i don't really enjoy fielding these assaults but on the other hand this is the best-selling book i've ever done you know oh it's going crazy hey i love it by the way oh thank you people are really responding to it and again the controversy may not be so bad controversy can be good yeah but it hurts me personally to read this crap you know one of your neighbors
I haven't met her.
I've only lived there two years.
I'm sure I'll run into her eventually.
But that's a different thing altogether.
I mean, this is genre fiction.
People don't take it that seriously.
She's got her fans.
That's true.
I mean, I don't mean to dismiss her work, but it is a different thing.
It's not...
reviewed as seriously as literature is.
So therefore you do read the reviews that you get very carefully?
Sure, not very well.
Yes, I do.
I do.
I have to admit it.
I don't blame him, because you see, a lot of people lose sight of the fact that criticism is supposed to be disinterested, and if you do have a bias, you're supposed to beg off that review, as I have done many times.
And I do hold a grudge because people are so petty.
On the other hand, you've got to put it behind you, and you've got to expect it.
And you also then have to praise the people who, you know, it really gives you a charge when you have somebody who reads it in the way that you felt you intended it.
Michael Gerger from The Post, wonderful critic, a Pulitzer Prize winning critic.
He loved my book, gave it a full page.
And he found a few problems with the crime.
But he didn't mock me, you see.
I think it's the mocking review that you want us to pay for a person over.
How dare they, in 20 minutes, you know, take... I am a work that takes so much time.
I don't review... And who are they, after all, you know?
Who are they?
Are they my equal?
Do they appreciate or understand what I do?
Are they capable of understanding?
Particularly with satire, a lot of people...
It pushes their buttons and they don't really get what the aim of it is.
I've only reviewed a couple of books in my time because I simply don't have time.
I'm teaching, I'm traveling with books every year, and I'm writing books.
And twice I've reviewed books very prominently by prominent authors who perhaps had written a lesser book.
I could take that anyway.
I want it, couldn't I?
My reviews always...
There's so many ways of putting criticism.
My reviews have done reviews in which I say, this person's career has done such and such, and I admire this and that, and in this book there are many things I admire.
Then you give a paragraph of reservations, because you're obligated to do that, I think, if you're going to take on a review.
But you could twist that any way you want, you know.
If you do it respectfully...
you take the book on its terms and you don't when i was in editing the book setting i would never i would never have no mocking review period i mean and i didn't and i didn't even try and take the high road somebody turned in something that sandwiched the person because i'd kill it well first again nick i mean i would be disingenuous if i said that i ex here i am pushing buttons making fun of of liberals and their hypocrisy but there's a demonstrating fun i think it's like
demonstrating the anatomy of racism, because it's meant to correct their behavior.
I'd be disingenuous if I said I expect them to love me for doing that, you know.
But again, ultimately, I don't care, because I'm going to do exactly what I want anyway, have total confidence in my vision and what I'm doing, and to hell with that.
That's a great quote.
I see these in text.
Thank you.
Some of the reviews have said that you're kind of exploring new levels of your ability here.
I am trying to.
And I agree with that.
But I still think you're very funny.
In this book, yes, I am.
But it's a different kind of humor, isn't it?
As I mentioned before, I like this book.
I love it.
There's no bite to it.
And, you know, I think maybe that's what's...
I like what you say, it has bite to it.
I agree.
I've been defending myself in this way.
Satire has to have bite to it.
And if it bites, sure, if it bites, it hurts.
I'm glad you see it that way.
There are plenty of people in my camp, I don't mean to cough about this, and when you write something about a topic as controversial or this, people are just going to go haywire anyway.
Did you anticipate this, what is it, 187, the proposition, I don't know if I got the number right?
Yes.
It's kind of written as a... This is written, well...
The whole drumbeat was sounding, but this book was finished in August of last year, prior to the November election.
And I began it in December of 82.
It took me a year in the writing, but there were certain dislocations in my lifetime.
Three months on tour of Wellville, and then a move to an old house that needed repair, and et cetera, et cetera.
Yeah, I guess I did, but I wrote it actually to sort out my own feelings.
uh on proposition 187 on this kind of demonizing of a whole class or race of people um to respond to the articles about illegal immigrants that are very inflammatory in the la times every day to uh to reveal what the liberals really say at the cocktail party when no one's listening you know it's definitely
I don't know.
The decade still has five years for one.
For me, it's almost a quintessential California novel of the 1990s.
It's a lot of descriptions.
But would you accept that?
I like that idea, and I hope that it will open the debate for others.
You know, the people who live in Arroyo Blanco, like Jack Jardine, they make no bones about it.
You know?
They make no bones about how they feel.
Delaney, though, I mean him to be sympathetic to a degree.
Yes, he's a figure of satire.
He's well-meaning, but you know, so are we all.
But when it comes down to a moment of action, do you act?
And he doesn't.
And he becomes drawn into this hate and paranoia that is absolutely pandemic out there.
I tell you, it is.
I am not advocating illegal immigration.
I am opposed to it.
However...
I'm much more opposed to this kind of painting everybody with a brush.
All Mexicans are dirty.
They're all illegal.
They're all evil.
I love Mexican culture, but that's beside the point.
What I mean is, if you know an individual of any race, whatever, you can't then say that all of these people are evil.
My intent here is to let you know a couple of people and judge for yourself.
You'll notice that twice in the book, Delaney blames people for having done something they didn't do.
The first time, Jose Navidad, who we know did something really evil, is blamed for the fire, which he didn't set.
And secondly, Delaney blames Kundilo for the graffiti, which, as it turns out, Jack Jr.
did.
And even when he discovers that, he's so far convinced anyway, he ignores it.
You know, I was doing work on my book and spent some time, quite a bit of time, in California.
And I remember going out to Bel Air, to what is essentially a gated city.
It's a neighborhood.
I mean, you go through these archives, and you see Glow South, who's a major Hollywood producer, and he was there.
And I mean, every house has these gated cities.
I think maybe people aren't aware of how
Well, there are a lot of ironies in the book.
I mean, who is building the gate?
The gate is built by the illegals, you know?
They're driving to school.
And so she was asking about the book.
And I said, she said, well, he's putting on...
I said, they're putting a cape around the government to Asia.
I said, it's to keep the Mexicans out.
I said, really?
I said, but it's the government.
Thank you.
There are so many ironies in the book.
That was the fun of it for me.
It cuts so many different ways, all these ironies in the book.
Oh, I have a 15-year-old daughter as well who is missing me right now terribly because she has nobody to type her college papers for her.
She's taking college courses now.
And where's old dad when she needs him?
Dad cleans up the language.
He can't help himself.
You know, I teach.
I read each of my students and I usually will have about 40 to 45 per semester.
writes four original things, no length limit, per semester.
I had copy at it line by line, so I can't help but help her clean it up a little bit.
I mean, imagination is everything, invention is everything.
How much of this is how it works?
In this particular book?
In general, in terms of the work ethic, when you're tracking it.
Well, I think since 1978, I guess it is.
Yeah, since I got out of graduate school.
I met at USC.
I'm a guy who sticks with things, you know.
I like to make jokes about my first wife.
She was such an incredible pain in the ass.
I've stayed with her all these years.
You know, a lot of times in a Q&A after a reading, a lot of the audience wants to know about that.
How much of it is perseverance in work and how much of it is a kind of natural gift?
If you don't have a natural gift, can you be a great artist?
Well, the sad answer is no.
But if you do have the gift, and many people do, which is one of the excitements of teaching to see how many people do have the gift, it takes a kind of fanatical perseverance to develop it.
and to continue to develop.
I could have written another Road to Wellville kind of comedy and satire.
I want to do something that twists in your gut.
I want to do something different.
Because if you don't, I think you're dead.
You write the same book over and over again.
You know what's fun about that?
Well, it might be fun, but I don't think you grow at all.
Well, you're under 50.
I mean, you do see it as a body of work.
If somebody was to read, to set out to read the T.C.
Boyle, do you really recommend they start with book one and ask the questions?
Sure, and what would we see in your view?
It's very interesting.
A few years ago, I'm hoping I'm asking questions that you haven't had.
These are good questions.
A few years ago, a guy did a profile on me in the New York Times.
I believe it was Bruce Weber.
It was in my fifth or sixth book.
He said, you know, you've got a real oeuvre here.
I said, first I wanted to deny it.
Then I began to realize that he was right.
If I look back on my ten books,
and I'm sure you're well aware of some of the themes and obsessions that come through, you don't begin a career saying, you know, I'm going to write a bunch of novels, and these are my themes, and these are my obsessions, and this is what I'm going to say.
It evolves.
And it's one of the...
One of the magical things about producing each story or each novel is to see where it's going to take me and what that says about me, about my society, how I feel about life, the universe, the lack of meaning, the meaning that we can find, whatever.
I'm still looking for it in each book.
Is it serendipitous?
To a degree.
But, you know, everything is still linked.
If you look at all the books, they are linked very closely.
Thematically and through the repeated obsessions and characterizations, types of humor.
I don't know.
I just want to work into the future to see what happens next.
It's a very legally written book, I think.
I mean, this could very easily...
Well, again, a lot of people are attacking me because my last book was made into a movie.
They don't know anything about me.
They've never read any of my other books.
They don't know that I've never had anything to do with Hollywood.
And they say, well, he's just writing a book to exploit an issue to get a movie sale.
Which, as you know, couldn't be farther from the truth.
How do you respond to that?
Well, I think they're speaking out of ignorance.
This is the third book I've written on the topic of racism.
I'm just trying to work it out here.
I had nothing to do with Alan Corker's movie of Warville.
Of course, I did sell the rights, and I didn't have to do that.
I thought he did a good job, but I didn't have anything to do with it, and I will never have anything to do with anybody's movie.
If they make a movie good, as you know, and I think we've discussed before, I see a movie as a marketing tool for my book to get it out to more people.
That's why I like movies.
And, of course, my daughter needs orthodontia, and I do need money, you know.
Can I tell you how many authors I interviewed?
And I asked the question, and my favorite answer is George Higgins.
He said, well, I sold it.
I sold it.
And when the check cleared the bank, it was there.
I agree.
I couldn't agree more.
That's my life's work is on the show.
That's a healthy attitude because you see the authors who are so frustrated with Hollywood are ones who feel that this is their baby and they're going to have control.
It really screws up the book and the final analysis, I think, to the author.
Yes, it's trying to... I would never go back.
I don't want to go back.
It's another reason.
I don't want to collaborate with anyone.
I don't want a loss of control.
And I wouldn't want to go back and try to... This is it.
I mean, I don't just throw this stuff out casually.
This is it.
You know?
This is interesting.
I don't mind my talking to another author.
I wouldn't get work that's doing in my piece, but Tim O'Brien right now, for instance, is going back.
He's going over Cacciato, he's going over... Why?
Why?
Why is that?
He said, I have a responsibility to produce the best possible work of mine, but I said, but Tim, that's completed work from 20 years ago.
Everyone has their own take, and I would not presume to criticize him.
I admire his work, particularly the things they carried.
I think it's a brilliant, brilliant book.
Personally, I wouldn't feel that that's a healthy attitude.
There are things that I might change in the early stories because the language is so wild.
But I wouldn't want to.
That's an historical thing.
That was me then.
It stands.
When I did the collected stories in England and eventually someday when I do collected stories here, every note will be the same.
I'm not going to change it.
I think, in a way, I owe it to the public to let them see what it was like originally.
My idea of being an artist is not to obsess about what I may have failed out in the past, but to try to figure out who I am tomorrow, to have a reason to get up and try to explore this world and find out what I feel about things.
I have to go forward, which is one of the reasons I think lab produced so much work.
I have to go forward.
You know, if I'm not working, I feel like shit.
I feel like shit now.
I've got a book to write, and it's going to be three months before I can start it.
Can I have some ketchup, please?
This is the one you'll be going to Madison for.
Yeah.
Now, Ben, I was there for about a week with my wife, who loves libraries, and she helped me enormously with this research.
Make sure you get a copy of that book.
It's all about library formation.
Oh, right up my alley.
That's interesting.
I like to think of it as a fable.
You know, it takes off, obviously, from Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath.
I mean, that was the inspiration for it.
I'm trying to reevaluate his ethos from 1939.
I'm not trying to rewrite Steinbeck.
I'm not trying to challenge Steinbeck.
I'm just thinking about his ethos.
I love the Grapes of Wrath.
You know, in 1939, we had police blocking the borders of California to keep out American citizens who wanted to migrate there.
Now we have police blocking the borders to keep out non-American citizens who want to migrate there.
I wonder how that stacks up, though, because in Standex Day, there were not 5.5 billion people on the earth.
And yes, of course, we can all say we'll reach down a hand to the downtrodden.
But how does that operate in 1995 in a world of dwindling resources, in a world where people really are the enemy?
It's no accident that Delaney is a naturalist.
Naturalists and ecologists, for the most part, are liberals across the board.
But in this one issue of immigration, they are totally reactionary because who is the enemy?
People.
And then they tend to demonize people.
People are worthless.
They're the ones throwing garbage in the woods.
They're the ones, condito, eating the last canyon wrench to survive.
Delaney thinks, what is the value of a human life as opposed, let's say, to this carrion bird, the condor, of which there are only 72?
And I think that's my object.
You know, I've always been Darwinian from Descent of Man on.
How does that play?
How does Steinbeck's ethos play now?
And if I think of it as a fable, it's more like I'm thinking of something like The Wayward Bus, for instance.
I've stripped the language back to a degree.
I've given you four points of view.
uh i don't present the answers but i think you know where i stand and i think that that last line should grab you take it 10 minutes past the last line for delaney sitting on that roof in the rain maybe he'll reevaluate a little bit you know maybe part of this one of the delicious aspects of the satire is that he is a naturalist
I think in the wider scope of satire, did you set out to like this bit?
Did you see it from the outset as a satire?
I did, but you see, the tone sort of changes as we go on.
It evolved this way.
The kind of satire that I like best, and we may have said this in past interviews, derives from...
I kind of take that Flannery O'Connor had on things.
She was very important to me.
I read her when I was a college student and just beginning to write.
You catch the audience off guard.
They feel there's going to be a humorous satire.
Although in this book, I think right from the outset, you know it's going to be very dark.
And it turns on you gradually.
You're not even aware of when it turns.
But when it does, it takes that laughter and makes it catch in your throat.
And it makes you feel bad.
That's what I'm after here, you know?
I realized at some point that my instincts are to make it a flat-out comedy, make fun of everybody and everything.
This is different.
This has to have some kind of moral center.
It's got to give a voice and a face to the guys selling the oranges on the street that we drive by every day, and all the laborers lined up for work.
I wanted them to be represented.
And maybe if I'm harder on Delaney and Cairo than I am on Candido, it's because I know them better.
And I think that their behavior needs correcting.
They're my neighbors.
And their behavior needs examination and maybe correcting.
I'm not preaching.
I'm just saying maybe.
You judge for yourself.
So I think the book does evolve.
Again, I don't know what I'm going to say.
I write a book in order to sort out my feelings and let it grow, let it evolve, see what happens day by day.
The humor, of course, is organic, too.
I don't think you can try to be funny.
That's my approach to life.
It always has been a kind of absurdist view of things.
And I love inhuman conversation just to draw it on things.
I can't help it.
Because if you try to summarize this and to say what's funny, you blow it because you lose the context.
And I think a lot of this comes out of... To go back to the visual aspects, and I didn't mean to suggest that you were writing this for the screen, but do you write visually?
Do you actually see your characters?
Sure.
You know, I'm the first of the TV generation.
When I was a kid, I watched TV all day and all night.
I didn't read books.
I think it's inevitable that in this age, writers visualize things.
In words, yes, but visualize them in a way that maybe past generations didn't.
We might not spend as much time with the description as the Victorian novelists did.
For instance, every character's face is described in detail in a Victorian novel.
Every aspect of this room would be described.
Every cup, every saucer, everything.
Maybe we do that in shorthand.
But I think...
The movement of my stories is always very visual.
The imagery of what you see and how you set the scene is always visual.
And I think that comes from the fact that we grew up on TV and on movies.
I think, to go back to the earlier question of the hard work part and the creative part, I think making it visual probably comes from the hard work part.
You know, I mean, after you've written, I don't know, maybe a model of that, but I think that was going line by line
It comes natural.
But it is hard work, and it's revised over and over and over.
You know, I complained about critics earlier.
But there's nice things, too.
And one guy, a columnist, writing about Wellville, not a book guy, but a columnist, said...
said that this is very funny, and it looks totally effortless, which means the author busted his arm right in it, and the guy is exactly right.
That's right.
The idea is to make them look easy.
One of the critics I love says,
It's like he made the revelation that you were doing a copy of Annie Dillard, and you tell him straight away.
Again, that was difficult for me because I love Annie Dillard.
I didn't want to do a really outrageous parody because it wouldn't be credible.
You have to believe that Delaney actually wrote this.
I had to rein in that, too, because my instinct is to make it a flat-out parody where you read it and you fall on the floor laughing.
I had to rein it in so you could believe that Delaney wrote it.
Delaney is this guy who...
You know, in the many, many ironies of the book, he's got the $300 sleeping bag.
He goes out to hear the coyotes howl.
The next scene, you see Condito, you know, living in the bushes because he's got no choice with no shower and no toilet or anything else.
And dying virtually.
And it went over.
And dying.
Yeah.
You talk about the name of America.
I mean, you talk about an ironic name for a Catholic, too.
But it is a common name.
A common name.
You know, we think that we possess the name America, but we don't.
Yeah, no, I mean, I choose, and Condi, though.
And the name of Condi, though, you know, like Voltaire's Condi.
This is the guy who has every pile of shit upon him.
And again,
If you see it as a fable, sure, most Mexicans coming across the border, and even Guatemalans and people from Latin America, Central America, really have a community to go to.
And they may live in very poor conditions, but they often have relatives, villagers, and they're absorbed.
I could have written about them, but in terms of a fable, I want the highest contrast that I can get.
And it is true that many people do live in the bushes.
I hiked back in Topanga Canyon.
I lived there for 10 years.
in Woodland Hills, over at Crankham.
People are living there.
You see the sleeping bags in the dirt where they're out lined up for work, you know.
I wanted to write about the most extreme example, obviously for the ironic
collision of these two types of life.
To go back to this concept of a California problem, what do you say to the rest of America, people who all they know about California is what they see on television?
I say we're in big trouble, big, big trouble, ecologically especially.
and also if you extend ecologic problems to the fact that we are one species, which I want to remind the reader of, we are all one species.
Nonetheless, despite tribalism and race, animal species are going to migrate according to conditions, and those may be economic conditions, those may be conditions where you get resources, and of course Delaney makes this parallel in his columns.
The idea of a sovereign country is breaking down.
I think we're getting more and more factionalism.
I think we're getting out of control.
I don't like it.
I don't like demonizing any class of people or race of people.
Yes, I suppose immigrants will be absorbed just as they were in the past.
In the book I'm doing now,
reading through the papers of this family.
The wife was complaining because the gardener didn't speak English.
This is 1920.
I assumed immediately Mexican.
No, there were no Mexicans in Santa Barbara, which is about 50% Hispanic now.
The Italians.
All the Italians were brought to California at that point to run the vineyards and be stonemasons for the big estates.
Really?
We do get absorbed eventually.
However, it seems to me that the population pressures of the world are just...
beyond hope, beyond hope or redemption at this point.
You know, on the other side of the coin, in terms of being a sovereign country, Mexico is a very corrupt government.
It's a one-party system and has been since the revolution in 1916 and on.
The previous government and the previous generation advocated big families.
We now have one million people per year coming into the job force in Mexico.
which has a chronic 40% unemployment.
The wage per day, if you get a job, is $3 a day.
You cross the border, you might starve.
You might live in the bushes.
But if you get a job, you're going to make $3 an hour.
What would you do?
When I started this book, I've been to Mexico many, many times in the past and traveled through it.
But I hadn't been for a while.
And I went back to Tijuana just for a day.
to go walk along the fence, just walk along the fence all the way down to the Pais on the beaches, just to look at it and talk to some people.
Oh, you got guys, you know, old, standing there with a little spring bag with their shit in it, waiting for dark to come.
And meanwhile, on the other side, all of the agents are looking very suspiciously at you because you're on the other side of the fence.
Like maybe you got a country on the other side.
Yeah, or maybe I'm a coyote or something.
And it is true that from my reading, I don't know this from fact, but I mean from experience,
that there are many gangs on both sides of the border to prey on these poor people.
We don't think of the Mexicans' racism and intolerance either in this, but they are, we are very humane in this country.
The Mexicans dealing with
the immigrants coming through the south of Mexico to America from Guatemala, Salvador, etc.
They are vicious to these people, you know, beyond what you could dream of.
This is hot tea.
I enjoy this interview because we've talked about some far-ranging things.
A lot of people are only interested in the politics of the book.
But the politics of this book are a starting point for me.
And then it becomes a work of art, you know, an expression of what I feel.
And I would rather talk about that than talk about the issues.
I don't want to talk about Proposition 87.
I don't want to be co-opted by the other side.
Boyle said this or Boyle said that.
I want people to read the book and think for themselves.
other spaced out hippies would say to me, man, you ought to really meditate, you know?
And I pointed out to them, I do meditate every day for about four or five hours at the typewriter.
And if it is fun, it's a way of, some days, you're a writer, you know, some days you never get loose of the conscious mind.
You just can't shake it.
You got problems, whatever, you can't shake it.
But mostly, at some point,
You do lose track of where you are, who you are, and what you're doing.
And that's the magic of it.
That's great.
That's when you enter it.
I remember that story with John Keegan.
Have you ever read any of his stuff?
No.
The face of battle and all that?
No, I don't know.
The face of battle is a classic.
I remember him saying that he said about 14 books.
He said, when he wrote that book, he did get a zoom.
It's almost like that.
And I felt the same way.
I remember there were 14 months.
I can tell you I know I lived.
I went to sleep at night.
Well, you see the excitement of it.
And particularly in creative work, we talked earlier, the excitement is, how does it come together?
I think more and more that a book is a puzzle for the author.
Why did I start with this character and this voice?
Why did I lay down these certain symbols in the first couple of chapters?
Well, the resolution of that will take 350 pages, and I'm going to find out.
And at a certain point toward the end, you begin to find out.
And then you work day and night.
You're in a creative frenzy, and you have tremendous joy and satisfaction in finishing it.
and making it just right of course i last about 10 seconds and you think holy shit what am i going to do next so it is something of an epiphanous process for you absolutely making discoveries along the way absolutely do you start with the voice the character of a other concept
Good question.
More and more now.
I think in the earlier stories I was more interested in form.
Form and maybe a concept.
I'm less interested in character.
Now I think there's a better balance between all three in my work.
And I think to answer the question, probably I begin with a voice.
That's a certain point.
whether it's going to be an eye narrator or a third person, and what the tone will be like.
I think that's what starts it now.
So whose voice started this?
Well, I knew that I would want to do a third person.
I've only done one novel in the first person.
That's certainly the character who is speaking to you, though.
not in this you see it's in delaney's mind to open up with yes okay so it is his not his voice exactly it's mine but it's very very strongly from his point of view it's such a close third person that it's almost like a first person but that allows me then to enter all four of the characters and this new novel will also be in a third person it gives me the freedom
with language if it's a first person it sometimes has to be limited to the range of what that character could credibly say and think and write like but if it's in third person i can be me and and do anything i want with language and in this one of course the language is simpler the next one though i'll be i think i'm going to return to a much more um wild sort of portrayal of things do you have a sense of who your reader is when you're in
No, I have no idea who my reader is, and I'm always amazed at the book signings to find out who they are.
It's pretty much everybody.
Mostly my audience has been younger college students, high school students, I mean, proportionately.
But this book, I'm finding for the first time, I have a tremendous female readership for this book.
And experts in the field, that is females, have told me the reason is
that they felt that I got into the heads of the female characters and portrayed them realistically and synthetically.
And that to me
is a wonderful compliment because I've always... I think so.
I've always tried to do that.
And, you know, I joke with them at the bookstores about this.
I said, well, you know, I've lived with a woman for 25 years now, and maybe I'm starting to get a handle on it.
I've lived in a house entirely with women.
I have two daughters, Elaine Clark Gisley, and a female black lab.
Wow.
But, of course,
You're their slave.
You're their full-time slave.
Well, maybe.
Well, I am.
I'm certainly the full-time slave of my family.
You mentioned in one of the interviews, I think, with Loba, that writers are kill maniacs.
I like that.
That's for sure.
That's something you want to keep.
I'm foremost among them, and I think that's another reason why I come in for such abuse and criticism, because they prioritize people.
But I'm totally... Nothing happens in a vacuum.
Yeah, I'm totally confident in what I do.
I don't care.
I mean, I have my own vision.
And if I have a goal beyond an aesthetic goal, it's to force literature, that is my literature,
in the arena of all the popular writing that's out there, without any compromise, doing exactly as I want.
But then, that's why I go on the 30-city tour.
And each six-month reporting period, each of my books sells more.
I'm not talking Michael Crichton here, but each sells more each six months.
Since 79, when The Center of Man came out, my books have all been in print consistently.
And each time I go out on the road,
People buy the paperbacks, they see me, they hear about me.
That's very rewarding for me.
I would like that to continue.
I don't understand why when I walk on the airplane and take a pee and walk up the aisle and see hundreds of people reading, they're all reading John Grisham instead of me.
I mean, ten of them could be reading me, couldn't they?
Two would be nice.
I don't think that's an unreasonable goal.
You've got to keep working at it.
Keep working at it, but in your own terms.
You see, if you were to, say, calculate something and say, all right, you know, I write about this athlete who kills his wife in L.A., you know, then you're a hack.
If you do exactly what you would do,
And it's an act of seduction, writing pictures.
You seduce the reader into your point of view.
And I think I have no problem with going out on the road and seducing an audience to my point of view.
I admire that so much because so many authors who I interviewed, you know, 50 years ago, once they seem to reach a certain level of commercial success,
You can't buy anything.
We have more to combat now than we did 15 years ago in terms of popular culture and its fragmentation.
You remember there used to be general interest magazines like The Atlantic and Harper's?
We could all read them and have some common ground.
That doesn't exist anymore, or it exists at a very small level.
There's Runner magazine.
There's PC magazine.
Everything is fragmented.
What's the glue that's going to hold this all together?
You mentioned that each book has done better than the previous one.
What is, just out of curiosity, what's happening in terms of the numbers?
Well, this has been my best selling off out of the chute.
They announced the first printing of $100,000.
We now have, but they always hedge the debts, of course.
We now have $60,000 in franchise.
That's right.
It's 14 on the Ingram list, which means that it's being reordered heavily.
That's great.
So I have high hopes for it.
I think more than any of my books, this is a word of mouth book.
I told Paul not to do... I told Paul that I didn't want to do the late-night comedy shows on TV again.
I wanted to do more of the talk shows that are geared towards politics and issues and so on.
But I think that's what this book can appeal to.
That audience, it should appeal to.
I have high hopes for it in terms of getting the...
a larger audience for the next part.
Perfect for my column.
The fact that I mindfully target university towns, state capitals.
It just doesn't have to be any tape, by the way.
Say that again.
I love the highly educated audience, the university towns and so on.
But again, I've always felt that good literature
should have wide appeal.
Maybe I'm beating my head against the wall.
Maybe that's not possible anymore.
Maybe we are too fragmented a society.
I still feel that people should discover that some of our books, this one perhaps, are as readable, as much of a page turner as the latest detective novel that's out there.
And yet, it's so much richer than that too.
You know, I want to get that across.
I don't know if I ever will, but that's what I'm trying to do.
Going down the aisle of the airplane and seeing everybody reading the Christian mark.
It's very important to point out that just because something is literary doesn't mean that you can't enjoy reading it.
Exactly.
Every work of literature doesn't have to be boring.
Again, this is why in my public persona going out before the audience, I'm a charming guy.
There's no pretense.
There's no professorial demeanor.
There's no, you know, hieratic pronunciation of words.
It's just me.
And I love to give a show.
I love to blow them away.
I love to make them laugh.
I love to make them have a good time.
Because they can go out of there and say, yeah, you know, this literature stuff, it's not so bad, you know?
When you're writing a book, which apparently is all the time, and you're teaching, do you kind of share any of this with the students?
Or do you keep your own... Not really, because...
My job is to be their mentor and to help them develop in their own direction.
And at this stage of my career, most of them, almost all of them, all of them, everyone has read my work and know who I am and want to be in my class for that reason.
Are they undergraduates or graduates?
Primarily undergrads, but in the advanced section, anybody can take it.
I don't know who they are.
I read the manuscript, I take the person.
So we have a good mix, but primarily undergrads.
I don't want to impose my aesthetic views on them.
I want to impose all my other views, you know, in terms of developing in your own way, finding your voice, reading literature deeply, all of that.
But I don't want to make them be writers like me.
I want them to be writers like they're going to be.
So I'm very careful to keep my work out of it.
You know, sometimes someone will ask me a question and, of course, I'll answer it.
But basically, no.
I wouldn't presume to impose my work on them.
They can read it just as they would read work by Dennis Johnson or Tim O'Brien or Louise Erdrich or somebody else.
Do you essentially agree with John Brackett that I don't teach words or I coach?
He does himself a coach.
I would subscribe to that 100%.
By the way, I will see.
Mr. Barth for the third time in my life tomorrow night.
He's wonderful.
He's the keynote speaker at a three-day literary seminar at my old alma mater, Potsdam College in New York, of people who are writing about my work.
And it's going to be very interesting and a little intimidating to be there because, sure, I'll go in and say hello to everybody and give my reading and all of that, but I don't think...
I could be in the room when somebody's reading a paper on my work.
I look forward to reading the papers that they write.
But I think I'm going to hide out in my hotel room while the papers are actually being read.
So this is intimidating for you to find your work being...
No, no, no, no, no.
I'm very pleased because, you know, I was a graduate student too.
No, I mean, to be present for the reading of a paper would be very awkward for me and for the person reading a paper.
So I'm going to hide out and read the papers afterwards.
When you do your readings, are there favorite things that you do?
Do it differently?
I like to read new short stories.
uh so last night you didn't read from the i read from the novel uh i brought a new story along and i've read it a couple of times in a theater setting not in a bookstore setting and it was a perfect setting last night we had about 300 people in the boston public library very enthusiastic audience but i felt that i should read from the novel and i'm primarily reading from the novel
because it has been so controversial, and I want to give them a taste of what it is, so they can make up their own minds.
Here the reviews are great.
The reviews are wonderful here.
In some towns, they haven't been wonderful, and I feel that I want to show them what I'm doing.
But I will, in a couple of locations here, when I have a theater situation, I'll read them a news story.
I prefer that because they get a complete show.
They get the whole thing.
It's always hard to select a section of a book to read.
And on many of the tours for books, I haven't read from the book at all.
I've just read stories.
When you're reading, either from finished work or from work in progress, are you ever tempted to change things as you go along?
No.
Well, occasionally, a phrase here and there.
And sometimes I will, for a public reading, cut back a phrase or two just to make it move a little more quickly.
But no, not really.
Once it's done, it's done.
We're talking about certain writers who obsess over fast work.
I do the best I can.
Henry James goes back and intends to write prefaces and finds himself rewriting the work.
No, I don't think I'll ever do that.
As we said earlier, I want it to stand as it was.
It's a part of me at that moment.
I don't think I should change it, but I don't want to.
I really agree with that.
You know, I mean, did I write about it?
Didn't Lydworth change the revival of poetry?
And I'm feeling they made it worse, I think.
Yeah, well, there's that danger, isn't there?
I hadn't thought of that.
But, you know, what we said earlier is my credo on this.
I want to grow.
I want to go forward.
I don't want to go backwards.
I got plenty of stuff now, but I don't want to overstay.
I would like to shoot some pictures of those.
Yeah, let's do that because Paul said we've got to go sometimes.